Bishweswor Prasad Koirala's (BP) Memorial Day was observed last week throughout the country highlighting his multi-faceted contribution to Nepali society. If politics, and particularly democratic socialism, formed one end of the spectrum, the other was his literary genius, which was spread over novels, stories. interviews, and essays. It is enigmatic that politicians contributing to differing ideologies, even diagonally different, consider him as the ace political statesman of Nepal. Though he reigned for a short period of little more than a year, he has left a deep mark in the minds of the people in Nepal and abroad. This is in stark contrast to those politicians who have managed to remain at the top for decades together but are barely remembered. Even if remembered, it is for their bad deeds.On the occasion of his Memorial Day, its brainchild, the Nepali Congress (NC) and its fraternal institutions organised quite a few programmes. In one of them, the NC's President Sher Bahadur Deuba virtually took the forest for the trees by stressing on BP's policy of reconciliation, which however is a mere chapter of his voluminous political book. He did not bother to highlight on democratic socialism which forms the spine of his political ideology. In fact, BP's democratic socialism is regarded as forcibly buried alive after the handover of state-run industries to the private sector. With the political aspect dismissed as irrelevant, BP's concept of socialism – comparing the outdated practice of keeping a milch cow in the front yard in an age of mushrooming dairies – has receded, while his literary contribution has increasingly begun to assert itself.This was projected very clearly at a programme last week staged by Jana Nayak BP Koirala Memorial Trust (BP Trust) by publishing two books. These were based on rigorous research carried out by Professor Hari Prasad Parajuli back in the seventies. The Academy promotes the publication of research made on BP's contribution. One of the books featured Dr. Parajuli's doctoral dissertation focussing on his literary endowment consisting mostly of stories. The other revealed BP's rare works, some of which were authored in Hindi originally but translated later in Nepali.
Whilst BP's protégé, first and former President of Republic Nepal Ram Baran Yadav had graced the programme as the chief guest, the General Secretary of the Academy, senior NC leader Ram Chandra Pokharel had chaired the programme. On the podium were literary luminaries like Professor Dhruba Chandra Gautam. What was very striking is the fear and even terror undergone by the researcher Parajuli and his thesis supervisor, Dr. Gautam, at the height of the Panchayat era. Students and professors both considered it hazardous to undertake or supervise any study on B P Koirala's writings. But Professor Parajuli and Gautam stuck to this noble task little fearing the possible consequence.Freudian psychology forms the nerve of BP's stories. Freud's theory is overwhelming, but it can be described as revolving around id, ego, and superego for the sake of simplicity. The id is the urge to take action, the ego is the drive to enjoy it, and the superego controls both by setting limits or stopping the action completelyFor example, delicious sweets are a kind of id but for a diabetic, it should be taken in moderation or not at all. Whilst the ego urges one to consume it, the superego controls one from doing so. The domination of ego over superego leads to tension in life. The domination of superego over ego in turn leads to low profile of the individual. These three aspects can be seen in varying degrees in the stories of BP. The ego and superego are both shaped by physical, social, cultural, and economic factors.For example, in Doshi Chasma (The Defective Spectacles), Keshabraj has one defective eye due to a change in his eye power. However, his ego is so weak that he refuses to change the lenses due to his seemingly weak financial condition. As a result, he fails to salute the General passing right in front of him. Keshabraj harbours the fear that the General may be angry, but in fact, the General has not noticed him at all. Keshabraj maintains a low profile due to the domination of his superego over his ego.In another story, Sakhi (lady friend), Chandrakumari interacts with her husband's friend, who asks for a kiss. After repeatedly refusing, she finally yields to his request. When he ignores Chandrakumari, she cries loudly and tears up his letters. Here, the ego has dominated the superego, causing tension that leads to crying and tearing the letters.Though this world is about the constant struggle of id, ego, and superego, nowhere does it surface prominently as in BP's stories. Written in simple language, it is understood by all. His simplicity in stories and novels is similar to poet Bhupi Sherchan's clarity in Nepali poems. Both, though lucid, provide a powerful message to the reader.BP was Nepal's first popularly-elected prime minister, well known for his political philosophy of democratic socialism. But after his imprisonment following the ban imposed on the political parties in 1960, he started being addressed as a writer because it was risky to describe him as a politician during the absolute monarchy. Again, after the restoration of democracy in 1990, his political philosophy was expected to make a comeback, but it was openly abandoned by the NC government although professing to follow it in words. It is no wonder that his literary aspect has again come to the fore while his political agenda has been placed on the back burner.